Thu Jan 11 09:53:11 PST 2018

Yesterday Duncan and I talked at length about what constitutes a completed
thesis. I threw out the somewhat ambitious goal of finishing a draft by the
end of the year.

From what I can tell of Duncan's philosophy, it's not "do X, Y, Z and
you're finished". It's more along the lines of "Set an ambitious goal and
see how far you can go."

For examples of completed PhD theses I could look at those from Duncan, Gabe,
Nick, Mark Abrahms, Michael Lawrence, Hadley Wickham.

The general form of my thesis is to start with the problem / motivation,
and say "here's what we aspired to, here's how far we got and what we
learned along the way". In my case the aspiration is a system
capable of transforming naive R code into more efficient R code based on
the data and platform.

For this to be more than a Masters thesis it needs to show a complete
system with some architecture and abstraction. It should be extendable, and
provide some framework for thinking about parallel code. Not just several
loosely related ad-hoc projects. One advantage of this topic is that it's
low risk in the sense that there are many different jumping off points for
new avenues of research to pursue.

## Specific things

One possible thesis result is a way to describe a computational strategy.
This could be ch 2, then ch 3 has specific examples.

TODO: Continue to write down specific examples.

I need to start turning my attention to the harder problems of general code
analysis rather than implementation and "plumbing".

Need some kind of data structure for parallel code / idioms, ie. maps and
reduces.

TODO: Find a corpus of code so we can say somethign empirical about how
often various R idioms appear in the wild. See what Jan Vitek has done.

DONE: Subscribe to R-devel mailing list

Not many other people / technologies are working on integrating knowledge of the data into
compilation / code transformation, so this is one way that this research
can be considered novel.
