Wed Dec 19 10:07:35 PST 2018


## Teaching 141BC Winter 2019

Meeting with Nick, Duncan and Clark

When planning the course, start by specifying the learning objectives, and use these to guide what material to include.

An early lecture showing how many different technologies fit together and giving historical context would be helpful.
Nick and I might be able to share lecture material for this.
Also it's useful to show which technologies are hot in the job market.

Posing good online questions is a skill for students to develop.
Questions should include minimal reproducible examples.

Duncan's goal in 242: 'Go interview and not embarrass anybody.'

Piazza: tell students they can opt out.

Participation can be used to bump letter grades.


## Assignments

Measure of software similiarity (MOSS) can be used to check plagiarism. https://theory.stanford.edu/~aiken/moss/
Also ask the grader to keep an eye out.

Have students cite and acknowledge when they are working with someone, or when they borrow a code snippet from Piazza.

Canvas puts several dates on assignments: warn students that "available to" is not the same as "due".

Projects are nice if they give students a 'portfolio project' they can show employers at the end.

Students can volunteer to share assignments as solutions if they do well.
Ask them to remove their name and any hard coded paths.

Idea for project: compare performance between Julia and R implementations of some method.


## Lecturing

Duncan is willing to guest lecture.

Post data sets and software ahead of time so that students can prepare.

Live coding must be planned and intentional, and illustrate some concept supporting a learning objective.

Lecturing with code is somewhat like doing math on a blackboard.
Moving through and explaining each step is very different from slides.

Cut your losses if you get stumped on a question.
Try the obvious things, and if they don't work just say "I'll figure this out and post the solution later on Piazza"
