Fri Oct 12 16:32:33 PDT 2018

It's better to focus on the general case of task scheduling as it subsumes the more restricted model of all tasks branching and returning to a single process.
It's fine to use the UNIX fork as part of the implementation, especially hierarchically on a cluster of machines, but forked child processes should be capable of staying alive.

Be careful about using technical terms in a more casual sense, such as 'fork' and 'thread'.

Regarding Sacramento State, I should talk to Jerry Lundblad about teaching there.
I could also guest lecture for Nick so that Duncan can watch me teach.

### Writing Notes

I need to communicate more efficiently with Duncan in my writing.
In this case the material I wanted feedback on, the algebraic expressions measuring the program execution time, didn't appear until page 6.
It's good to record the whole train of thought that leads to these, but I should edit it so that Duncan only sees what I'm looking for feedback on.

I need to include more background and context, and be very explicit about what code I'm starting with, and who writes it.
That is, I need to be clear about what the inputs and outputs of the program are.
The last document assumed too much of this.

Pictures and diagrams of the computation are much better than code.
Duncan doesn't want to stare at code and figure out what it does.

To expand the examples I can think about many different data configurations, and what ways exist to do the computations.

I need to be clear, in my mind and on paper, what the starting point for the code is.
Does it read the data?

TODO: What is the technical name in statistics for models that can fit in chunks?
