
The long term goal is to graduate 3 years from now. The next milestone
towards
that goal will be taking the PhD qualifying exam.

Write along the way, keep notes for a record and know why particular
choices were made. Better to write prose first and then code.

Keep notes of meetings, decisions, timelines, target tasks.

Before meeting Duncan it's nice to send any background reading material one
or two days prior. It might not be read.

Possible PhD topics: 

1. Proving optimality of approach (all math)
2. Comparing and evaluating variety of approaches 
3. Big hard applied problem (don't need to be new stats)
4. Novel new approach- seems to work. Engineering style

Need at least two or three applications if building a new tool / technique.
Otherwise solve a very important problems.

Talk to Deb and other transportation people about open questions. It's
better not to be creating a model- that's the domain of the transportation
people.

For visualization talk to Kwan-Liu Ma in CS.

## Goal

This quarter I'll be taking a class in transportation from civil
engineering along with 8 units of independent study.

The goal of this quarter is to focus in more tightly on a thesis topic.

At the end of the quarter I'll turn in a report of the 3 or 4 things that I
want to focus on, why they're interesting, what are the challenges, and who
cares?  Make a good write up and report about this.

### Next week

Come up with better idea of how to use simulations with transportation
data, and how to apply statistics.
