Fri Jun 16 08:55:46 PDT 2017

## Long term

After graduate school.

Long term I'd like to have the option of either being a Professor at a CSU
or a data scientist / software engineer in industry. Right now I have the
basic qualifications for the latter. So if I want the option of the former I
should use my time in graduate school to prepare for it.

I'm interested in CSU Sacramento and Chico because these are places I would
like to settle with my family. Teaching colleges appeal to me more than
research Universities - less stress on publishing, smaller class sizes,
more down to earth. I should try teaching my own class while I'm a graduate
student. It would also be good to publish research.

My concern with the academic career path is that it may be difficult to
keep a healthy work / life balance while teaching 3 classes a semester and
managing other responsibilities. Another consideration is the size of the job
market- there may be 1 opening every couple years, while industry in the
Bay Area will have 1000's.

Regarding the relative number of positions, it may be possible to ease my
way in. I could start in a job and occasionally teach night classes.

Benefits of academia:
- Job security, once I have tenure
- Intellectual freedom, I can run classes as I like and teach subjects that
  I find interesting. Also side projects and consulting work.
- Stimulating to work with people excited to learn new things
- Vacation!

## Mid term

In graduate school.

A goal is to publish a paper and software. The automatic parallelism as
presented in my QE seems like the natural first topic.

In the fall I plan to volunteer tutoring stats / math / CS in the new
veteran's center for 1 hour per week.

## Short term

This year.

Goal:
- Automatic parallelism package
- Present package to BARUG in the fall
- Submit PeMS data analysis paper in traffic journal, maybe do some actual
  statistics here :)
- Highway traffic data analysis package (maybe?)

For this summer:
- Write disk sort / groupby in Matloff's partools, useful as preprocessing step for PeMS
  data. 2 weeks
- Develop automatic parallelism software targeting apply family of
  functions on SNOW cluster first. Multicore likely easier. 3 months
- PeMS data analysis and apply auto parallel. 1 month
