meetings/meeting180823.md, before:

Thu Aug 23 13:49:53 PDT 2018

Duncan and I met to talk about my chapter abstracts for my thesis.

They seem to be at the right (high) level, which is good. But now I need
to fill in more details.

Formatting:

- Make it clear that these are chapter abstracts
- Distinguish my notes from the text, and say in the
beginning what the formatting means.

A couple of the chapters are less related to the main ideas.

The chapter estimating execution times and data sizes is optional, ie. I
can start by assuming we have this information and work on the other
chapters. This is certainly a separate task both conceptually and in the
software. Side note - when doing it we can even look at the C code, and
build off the work Nick and Duncan are doing.

The chapter on statically analyzing a large corpus of R code is even more
optional / tangentially related. We could do this as a follow up to the
CodeAnalysis paper.

Understanding and digging into the relationship between the computing
platforms and the program is a very rich problem. I should find some more
examples of programs other than the Pems highway data analysis and show how
to use it. For example, simulations on our campus servers and clusters.

Next I can flesh out these high level abstracts with more information-
turn them into an outline containing section headers with titles and say 3
sentence abstracts. Keep these original chapter level abstracts also, that
way we can look at the document at various levels of detail. Then keep
going back and filling in the details and that will be the thesis.

Commit message:

also need to handle challenging static analysis

meetings/meeting180823.md, after:

Thu Aug 23 13:49:53 PDT 2018

Duncan and I met to talk about my chapter abstracts for my thesis.

They seem to be at the right (high) level, which is good. But now I need
to fill in more details.

Formatting:

- Make it clear that these are chapter abstracts
- Distinguish my notes from the text, and say in the
beginning what the formatting means.

A couple of the chapters are less related to the main ideas.

The chapter estimating execution times and data sizes is optional, ie. I
can start by assuming we have this information and work on the other
chapters. This is certainly a separate task both conceptually and in the
software. Side note - when doing it we can even look at the C code, and
build off the work Nick and Duncan are doing.

The chapter on statically analyzing a large corpus of R code is even more
optional / tangentially related. We could do this as a follow up to the
CodeAnalysis paper.

Understanding and digging into the relationship between the computing
platforms and the program is a very rich problem. I should find some more
examples of programs other than the Pems highway data analysis and show how
to use it. For example, simulations on our campus servers and clusters.

Duncan expects the static code analysis to handle the more difficult code
analysis tasks that I mentioned briefly- `<<-`, NSE, etc. So I have a lot
more work to do to capture these things.

Next I can flesh out these high level abstracts with more information-
turn them into an outline containing section headers with titles and say 3
sentence abstracts. Keep these original chapter level abstracts also, that
way we can look at the document at various levels of detail. Then keep
going back and filling in the details and that will be the thesis.
