
What would I like to know about a large software project?

- Complexity and quality as a function of time.


Vladimir Filkov's lab in Davis:

https://decallab.cs.ucdavis.edu/

> The DECAL (Davis Excellent/Eclectic/Extreme Computational Analytics Lab)
> Lab, allied with the Computer Science Department at UC Davis is an
> inter-disciplinary community of researchers who study software engineering
> practice, as well as emergent phenomena on the Internet: online
> communities, open-source projects and ecosystems, and large corpora of
> software source code.

They seem to be producing around 10 papers per year, which is great. Not
much on the website about software they're producing though.



## Paper

__Stochastic Actor-Oriented Modeling for Studying Homophily and Social
Influence in OSS Projects__

David Kavaler · Vladimir Filkov 2016

https://decallab.files.wordpress.com/2016/04/selectioninfluence.pdf

> we adapt the stochastic actor-oriented models from social network analysis.
> These models enable the study of the interplay between behavior, influence
> and network architecture, for dynamic networks, in a statistically sound
> way.

They use statistics on networks to formalize relationships between OSS
contributors. Main data source is email threads, which is more
sociological. They use the R `SIENA` package to model the networks. They
model social ties with no interaction as decaying over time according to an exponential distribution.
The overall flavor of this work emphasizes the evolving social
relationships, not so much on the evolving software.


## Paper


