Wed Oct 12 13:27:43 PDT 2016

## Detecting Parallelism

With this idea I'd analyze a program (ie. an R script) and see if I could
detect places where parallel computation is possible. Then the execution of
the code would change and automatically become parallel.

This is one of the initial projects that I pitched to Duncan, and it's
quite similar to what I proposed in the NSF application. Duncan has pointed
out that this may be easier in R because of the functional underpinnings.

If I have a fixed script and pure functions then I can do much more- I can look
at the code and data dependencies and execute more in parallel. This has
the potential to really accelerate an R script. I would enjoy learning more
about the theory of functional programming- and I believe it's really the
way to go for reliable parallelism.

Talking a bit with Nick about this today. If I can detect parallelism and
automatically generate code that runs on GPU's it would be quite useful.
Another advantage of this is that I could work more closely with Nick and
Duncan as a team.

Questions:
- Is it possible to automatically detect pure functions in R?

## CRAN task view

Dirk Eddelbuettel's task view is pretty comprehensive and a good place to
start. The __implicit parallelism__ section is of particular interest.

https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/HighPerformanceComputing.html

Luke Tierney did `pnmath` which replaces some R math functions with OpenMP threaded versions.
Revolution does similar.

Norm Matloff has `Rdsm` which does shared memory and threads.

## Paper

2008

R/parallel – speeding up bioinformatics analysis with R
Reviewed by Gonzalo Vera,1,2 Ritsert C Jansen,1 and Remo L
Suppicorresponding author2

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2557021/

Parallelizes loops with some new syntax. Revolution had something similar
at one point IIRC.
