analysis/traffic/notes.md, before:


What are all the useful things to do when rewriting code?  Duncan's very
helpful docs here http://www.omegahat.net/CodeDepends/design.pdf give a
handful of reasons.

Other things that I can think of:

- Given a big ugly script, pull out the minimal set of code to produce a
  final result. For example, everything needed to make `plot(finalresult)`.
- Separate single scripts into multiple scripts if they actually have two
  independent sequences of computation.

## TODO

- X Write manual parallel evaluation of the script
- Put the graph into a data structure handling the parallel blocks.
- X Write automated output.

## The right data structure

If the intermediate variable `b` is not used anywhere we probably want to
collapse the following into a single block of code, since it has to happen
sequentially. Therefore adding `future` here can't help at all. Unless it
should happen at the same time as another block... then two blocks can
execute simulataneously.

```
# Begin block
a = 100
b = a + 5
c = sum(b)
# end block
```

## Ways to fail

`fit = lm(y ~ x)` doesn't detect the dependency of `fit` on `x, y`.

Following the control flow for `lm` we see the following calls:
`model.matrix.lm`, `model.frame.default`, `as.formula`. But eventually this
`y ~ x` itself must be evaluated in which case `.Primitive("~")` is called,
which certainly does something weird. But what?

Haven't yet checked things like:
`<<-, assign`

## Permuting lines of code

Thought: Lines of code can run as task parallel if and only if permutation
preserves the semantics of the program.
True? Then rather than actually writing a
parallel evaluator we can permute the lines of code, inject a few comments,
and use `future` for evaluation.

Expanding on this, we could also use `future` as a mechanism for load balancing if
we have some idea how expensive each expression is. Better to
evaluate the long ones first in that case. Is that true generally?

I no longer remember the details of what the traffic simulation script
does. It would be helpful to visualize it at different levels of detail.

## Permuted scripts

Thought: Given an unordered set of expressions, could we infer what the
ordered script must be? Certainly not true in all cases, but here's a
trivial example where we could:
```
c = sum(b)
a = 100
b = a + 5
```
Would this be useful at all? Maybe for detecting errors in the code. But
that's not very interesting, because one can just do that with the regular
interpreter.

Commit message:

finally a decent looking graph font

analysis/traffic/notes.md, after:


What are all the useful things to do when rewriting code?  Duncan's very
helpful docs here http://www.omegahat.net/CodeDepends/design.pdf give a
handful of reasons.

Other things that I can think of:

- Given a big ugly script, pull out the minimal set of code to produce a
  final result. For example, everything needed to make `plot(finalresult)`.
- Separate single scripts into multiple scripts if they actually have two
  independent sequences of computation.

These ideas stay much closer to the syntax and language of R compared to
what Nick is doing.

## TODO

- X Write manual parallel evaluation of the script
- Put the graph into a data structure handling the parallel blocks.
- Write automated output.

## The right data structure

If the intermediate variable `b` is not used anywhere we probably want to
collapse the following into a single block of code, since it has to happen
sequentially. Therefore adding `future` here can't help at all. Unless it
should happen at the same time as another block... then two blocks can
execute simulataneously.

```
# Begin block
a = 100
b = a + 5
c = sum(b)
# end block
```

## Ways to fail

`fit = lm(y ~ x)` doesn't detect the dependency of `fit` on `x, y`.

Following the control flow for `lm` we see the following calls:
`model.matrix.lm`, `model.frame.default`, `as.formula`. But eventually this
`y ~ x` itself must be evaluated in which case `.Primitive("~")` is called,
which certainly does something weird. But what?

Haven't yet checked things like:
`<<-, assign`

Recursion? Iterating updates?

## Permuting lines of code

There are many possible scripts that can become the same task graph. The
task then is to pick the best one of these scripts.

Thought: Lines of code can run as task parallel if and only if permutation
preserves the semantics of the program.
True? Then rather than actually writing a
parallel evaluator we can permute the lines of code, inject a few comments,
and use `future` for evaluation.

Expanding on this, we could also use `future` as a mechanism for load balancing if
we have some idea how expensive each expression is. Better to
evaluate the long ones first in that case. Is that true generally?

I no longer remember the details of what the traffic simulation script
does. It would be helpful to visualize it at different levels of detail.

## Permuted scripts

Thought: Given an unordered set of expressions, could we infer what the
ordered script must be? Certainly not true in all cases, but here's a
trivial example where we could:
```
c = sum(b)
a = 100
b = a + 5
```
Would this be useful at all? Maybe for detecting errors in the code. But
that's not very interesting, because one can just do that with the regular
interpreter.
