# Goals

_Elaborate on reasons for taking this course and/or projected outcomes of
this experience._

- Preparing for the PhD Qualifying Exam _(Debashis suggests taking this in the
  Spring)_

Goal is to graduate 3 years from now.

# Course Plan

_Explain work to be undertaken (i.e., subject matter, text, reading,
specific responsibilities/duties)._

Since I'm taking 1 course this will be independent study for 8 units.
Here's how I plan to spend my time.

### 40% Literature Review

- Literature review on statistical applications in highway sensor data
- Literature review on distributed computational statistics, including work by Duncan
  Temple Lang, Ross Ihaka, Doug Bates, Michael Kane

### 40% Traffic Sensor Data

This data set will initially motivate my research and development in computational
statistics.

- Analyze 3 years of 30 second highway traffic sensor data for Bay
  Area traffic.  This is around 10 billion observations of 20 variables
  which is 400 GB if loaded in R.
- It's spatial temporal and can be represented as a graph. 
- Work with Nehad to load it into the department's new Spark cluster and
  make it available to department users.
- Contact [Professor Debbie Niemeier](http://faculty.engineering.ucdavis.edu/dniemeier/)
  and other faculty experts to learn about applications of traffic sensor data

### 10% Open Source Software

- Use cutting edge software stack (Spark, Python's dask +
  Bokeh) for the traffic sensor data.
- Participate actively with patches and mailing group discussions

### 10% Other

- Organize 5 student led seminars
- Present at RTG workshop
- Attend seminars / workshops

# Output

_Work to be produced and turned in by the end of the semester._

- Report (LaTeX, at least 10 pages) summarizing papers in literature review
- Report (LaTeX, at least 5 pages) describing traffic sensor data 
- Visualization (Web based) of traffic sensor data


# Notes

Write along the way, keep notes for a record and know why particular
choices were made. Better to write prose first and then code.

Nice for Duncan to have a log to read the day before.

Keep notes of meetings, decisions, timelines, target tasks.

Goal of this quarter is to focus in more tightly on a thesis topic.

Send Duncan a copy of application paper.

To turn in at the end of the quarter: These are the 3 or 4 things that I want to
focus on, why they're interesting, what are the challenges, and who cares?
Make a good write up and report about this.

Need at least two or three applications if building a new tool / technique.
Otherwise solve a very important problems.

Talk to Deb and other transportation people about open questions

For visualization talk to Kwan-Liu Ma in CS.

Possible PhD topics: 

1. Proving optimality of approach (all math)
2. Comparing and evaluating variety of approaches 
3. Big hard applied problem (don't need to be new stats)
4. Novel new approach- seems to work. Engineering style


### Next week

Come up with better idea of how to use simulations
