notes/jsm18.md, before:

Tue Mar 13 08:53:09 PDT 2018

The title for my JSM talk is "Automatic Parallelization of R Code" in the
section "Statistical Computing on Parallel Architectures". Norm is
completely open to me talking about whatever I find interesting. Even
challenges or "this is what we should do".

What key points do I want to convey in the talk?

- When the data gets big and complex we should first try to leverage
  and integrate with existing technologies rather than reinventing them.
- We can use R code to directly generate code that integrates with
  a larger system.

## PEMS as example

I plan on talking about the PEMS analysis. So I should at least fully
describe that use case in terms of the automatic parallelization.
I didn't want to generate the SQL before because it seemed too
specific. 

Here is the code to analyze:

```{R}
fd_shape = by(data = pems[, c("station", "flow2", "occupancy2")]
              , INDICES = pems[, "station"]
              , FUN = npbin
              )
```

The code above has the following characteristics: 

1. selects columns from table in the database
2. groups by one or more columns
3. apply an R function that produces a data frame

We can slightly generalize this by adding a row filter in the first step,
ie. analyzing `subset()`. We can generalize it further by letting the
`data` argument to `by()` be a more general query- then we probably want to
leverage existing SQL generation tools.

I assume that we start with the code. We can query the schema of the
database to find out the column names and classes of `pems`.  Then the code
analysis needs to infer the following things:

- `cluster_by = "station"`
      Comes from analyzing by(), could be multiple columns
- `input_table = "pems"`
      A free variable we're treating as a data frame
- `input_cols = c("station", "flow2", "occupancy2")`
      Column use inference, already have some tools to do that
- `output_table = "fd_shape"`
      The final assignment that we want to keep
- `output_cols = c("station", "right_end_occ", "mean_flow", "sd_flow", "number_observed")`
      From analyzing the return value of npbin
- `output_classes = c("integer", "numeric", "numeric", "numeric", "integer")`
      Need general type inference for this


## dplyr

dplyr can do a fair amount of this. It lazily builds up SQL queries and
fires them off when they're needed. Then the database is free to optimize
the SQL as it chooses. To execute the above code it needs to
call `do()` to execute arbitrary R code, and so brings all the data back
into the managing R session. This model doesn't work if the data won't fit
in the R session.

Can I leverage [dbplyr](http://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/dbplyr.html)
to generate the SQL? Let me try:

```{R}

library(dplyr)
library(dbplyr)
con <- DBI::dbConnect(RSQLite::SQLite(), path = ":memory:")

n = 10
local_pems = data.frame(station = rep(1:3, length.out = n)
    , flow2 = rnorm(n), occupancy2 = rnorm(n))

copy_to(con, local_pems, "pems", temporary = FALSE)

pems = tbl(con, "pems")

pems2 = select(pems, station, flow2, occupancy2)
groups = group_by(pems2, station)

# column selection is fine
show_query(groups)

fd_shape = do(groups, head(., 2))

# Doesn't work, presumably because the `do()` causes it to actually be computed
# show_query(fd_shape)
```

Suppose we use common aggregation functions:

```{R}
agg = summarize(groups, max_flow = max(flow2, na.rm = TRUE)
    , mean_occ = mean(occupancy2, na.rm = TRUE))
```

The SQL dbplyr generates looks reasonable:

```
> show_query(agg)
<SQL>
SELECT `station`, MAX(`flow2`) AS `max_flow`, AVG(`occupancy2`) AS
`mean_occ`
FROM (SELECT `station`, `flow2`, `occupancy2`
FROM `pems`)
GROUP BY `station`
```

What happens when we aggregate with a user defined function?


```{R}
udf_max = function(x) max(x, na.rm = TRUE)
agg2 = summarize(groups, max_flow = udf_max(flow2)
    , mean_occ = mean(occupancy2, na.rm = TRUE))
```

The generated SQL then assumes that `UDF_MAX` is a function available
inside the database. Then of course fails when it's not present. This
default forces the computation on the group to happen inside the database.

```
> show_query(agg2)
<SQL>
SELECT `station`, UDF_MAX(`flow2`) AS `max_flow`, AVG(`occupancy2`) AS
`mean_occ`
FROM (SELECT `station`, `flow2`, `occupancy2`
FROM `pems`)
GROUP BY `station`
>
> agg2
Error in rsqlite_send_query(conn@ptr, statement) :
  no such function: UDF_MAX
```

Reading through [dbplyr's SQL
generation](http://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/sql-translation.html#behind-the-scenes).
I've considered using something like Apache Calcite for an intermediate
semantic representation. Does dbplyr do this, or is it a direct translation
from R to SQL? The docs indicate that dbplyr creates an intermediate
representation building on `tbl_lazy`.

Is it worth it for me to build on this?

## Bigger picture

What's the motivation for all this? R's iterative development style is
productive and nice. But in the end we may want to run the code on a bigger
data set, or make it fast somehow. I would like to argue that we need to
leverage query optimization techniques if all we're doing is computing on
data frames. But the PEMS one doesn't _need_ any query optimization because
it's so simple. Hmmm.

There are some very similar popular technologies out there:
- lazy compute graph as in dask
- data flow as in tensorflow
- enqueuing operations into a GPU
- RSlurm package generating code that can run on SLURM

How is what I'm proposing different? All of the above require one to
program according to some specific model.
dplyr also requires programming according to a specific model, but then
generates code that can run on databases as well as data frames in memory.



## Scratch

We should note that this technology isn't specific to Hive. MS SQL server has
similar capabilities:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/advanced-analytics/r/how-to-create-a-stored-procedure-using-sqlrutils.

Commit message:

trying to separate SQL generation into a different problem

notes/jsm18.md, after:

Tue Mar 13 08:53:09 PDT 2018

The title for my JSM talk is "Automatic Parallelization of R Code" in the
section "Statistical Computing on Parallel Architectures". Norm is
completely open to me talking about whatever I find interesting. Even
challenges or "this is what we should do".

What key points do I want to convey in the talk?

- For seriously large data and computations we should try to leverage
  and integrate with existing technologies rather than reinventing them.
- We can use R code to directly generate code that integrates with
  a larger system.

## PEMS as example

I plan on talking about the PEMS analysis. So I should at least fully
describe that use case in terms of the automatic parallelization.
I didn't want to generate the SQL before because it seemed too
specific. 

Here is the code to analyze:

```{R}
fd_shape = by(data = pems[, c("station", "flow2", "occupancy2")]
              , INDICES = pems[, "station"]
              , FUN = npbin
              )
```

The code above has the following characteristics: 

1. selects columns from table in the database
2. groups by one or more columns
3. apply an R function that produces a data frame

We can slightly generalize this by adding a row filter in the first step,
ie. analyzing `subset()`. We can generalize it further by letting the
`data` argument to `by()` be a more general query- then we probably want to
leverage existing SQL generation tools. 

I assume that we start with the code. We can query the schema of the
database to find out the column names and classes of `pems`.  Then the code
analysis needs to infer the following things:

- `cluster_by = "station"`
      Comes from analyzing `INDICES` argument to `by()`, could be multiple columns
- `input_table = "pems"`
      A free variable we're treating as a data frame
- `input_cols = c("station", "flow2", "occupancy2")`
      Column use inference, already have some tools to do that
- `output_table = "fd_shape"`
      The final assignment that we want to keep
- `output_cols = c("station", "right_end_occ", "mean_flow", "sd_flow", "number_observed")`
      From analyzing the return value of npbin
- `output_classes = c("integer", "numeric", "numeric", "numeric", "integer")`
      Need general type inference for this

SQL generation, type inference- we can do these things. They may not be
fully mature technologies in R, but they're not that far out either. If we
assume that we have these capabilities then what can we say? Then we don't
have to worry about generating the SQL for `pems[, c("station", "flow2",
"occupancy2")]`- it's a different problem. But it matters here, because
we're generating the SQL for the `CLUSTER BY`, so we have to at least be
able to compose the SQL at the right place.


## dplyr

dplyr can do a fair amount of this. It lazily builds up SQL queries and
fires them off when they're needed. Then the database is free to optimize
the SQL as it chooses. To execute the above code it needs to
call `do()` to execute arbitrary R code, and so brings all the data back
into the managing R session. This model doesn't work if the data won't fit
in the R session.

Can I leverage [dbplyr](http://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/dbplyr.html)
to generate the SQL? Let me try:

```{R}

library(dplyr)
library(dbplyr)
con <- DBI::dbConnect(RSQLite::SQLite(), path = ":memory:")

n = 10
local_pems = data.frame(station = rep(1:3, length.out = n)
    , flow2 = rnorm(n), occupancy2 = rnorm(n))

copy_to(con, local_pems, "pems", temporary = FALSE)

pems = tbl(con, "pems")

pems2 = select(pems, station, flow2, occupancy2)
groups = group_by(pems2, station)

# column selection is fine
show_query(groups)

fd_shape = do(groups, head(., 2))

# Doesn't work, presumably because the `do()` causes it to actually be computed
# show_query(fd_shape)
```

Suppose we use common aggregation functions:

```{R}
agg = summarize(groups, max_flow = max(flow2, na.rm = TRUE)
    , mean_occ = mean(occupancy2, na.rm = TRUE))
```

The SQL dbplyr generates looks reasonable:

```
> show_query(agg)
<SQL>
SELECT `station`, MAX(`flow2`) AS `max_flow`, AVG(`occupancy2`) AS
`mean_occ`
FROM (SELECT `station`, `flow2`, `occupancy2`
FROM `pems`)
GROUP BY `station`
```

What happens when we aggregate with a user defined function?


```{R}
udf_max = function(x) max(x, na.rm = TRUE)
agg2 = summarize(groups, max_flow = udf_max(flow2)
    , mean_occ = mean(occupancy2, na.rm = TRUE))
```

The generated SQL then assumes that `UDF_MAX` is a function available
inside the database. Then of course fails when it's not present. This
default forces the computation on the group to happen inside the database.

```
> show_query(agg2)
<SQL>
SELECT `station`, UDF_MAX(`flow2`) AS `max_flow`, AVG(`occupancy2`) AS
`mean_occ`
FROM (SELECT `station`, `flow2`, `occupancy2`
FROM `pems`)
GROUP BY `station`
>
> agg2
Error in rsqlite_send_query(conn@ptr, statement) :
  no such function: UDF_MAX
```

Reading through [dbplyr's SQL
generation](http://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/sql-translation.html#behind-the-scenes).
I've considered using something like Apache Calcite for an intermediate
semantic representation. Does dbplyr do this, or is it a direct translation
from R to SQL? The docs indicate that dbplyr creates an intermediate
representation building on `tbl_lazy`.

Is it worth it for me to build on this?

## Bigger picture

What's the motivation for all this? R's iterative development style is
productive and nice. But in the end we may want to run the code on a bigger
data set, or make it fast somehow. I would like to argue that we need to
leverage query optimization techniques if all we're doing is computing on
data frames. But the PEMS one doesn't _need_ any query optimization because
it's so simple. Hmmm.

There are some very similar popular technologies out there:
- lazy compute graph as in dask
- data flow as in tensorflow
- enqueuing operations into a GPU
- RSlurm package generating code that can run on SLURM

How is what I'm proposing different? All of the above require one to
program according to some specific model.
dplyr also requires programming according to a specific model, but then
generates code that can run on databases as well as data frames in memory.



## Scratch

We should note that this technology isn't specific to Hive. MS SQL server has
similar capabilities:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/advanced-analytics/r/how-to-create-a-stored-procedure-using-sqlrutils.
