Thu Jul  7 08:45:00 PDT 2016

## Who did you meet at the 2016 useR and DSC?

In chronological order:

__Peter Wang__ CTO of Continuum, a major contributor to the scientific
Python stack. At Berkeley MMDS he presented some interesting ideas about
visualizing large data using [Bokeh](http://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/).
There are a couple of ideas:
- Visualizing large data sets is quite different from small data sets where
  you can see all the points
- It's not all that well studied or understood 
- Bokeh uses various components of the Python stack (dask, llvm) to quickly
  zoom, filter, aggregate, etc.

Understanding large data sets through visualization seems like an
interesting thesis topic.

__Michael Lawrence__ Core R developer and organizer of the ddR project this summer. He works at
Genentech with Gabe Becker supporting computational research activities. We had
several conversations around ddR and activities for this summer. Right now
the focus is on making Spark work with ddR.

__Edward Ma__ Engineer at HP Vertica, main contributor to ddR along with
Indrajit. He presented a talk describing ddR.

__Simon Urbanek__ Core R developer working at ATT Labs. Processing
distributed data at Petabyte scale in R - very cool! He gave a keynote on
RCloud and a similar talk at DSC.  He also alluded to the possibility of
internships.

__Doug Bates__ Retired Professor and former R core member, author of
`lme4` (one of my favorite R packages). He now contributes to linear
algebra and mixed models in the Julia language.

__Viral Shah__ One of the creators of Julia. The language is changing
quickly, which has it's ups and downs. The good is that it might be
good for research, trying totally new things. The bad is that it's not that
stable or widely used yet.

__Michael Kane__ Author of `bigmemory` and some other higher level tools
that sit on top of that. These extend functionality of R from
computation in memory into disk, without the hassle of a distributed
system. For individual data analysts without the dedicated support of systems
administrators and an engineering team I think that this is an appealing
way to scale computation beyond a single node.

__Bryan Lewis__ Collaborator of Michael Kane. Has written popular R
interfaces to SciDB and Redis, so has many ideas and suggestions on how to
emulate base R objects using different back ends.

Also met and spoke more briefly with Ryan Hafen, JJ Allaire, and Mario
Inchiosa. They're all working in the space of distributed computation in R.
