admin/va/fitzgerald_cover_letter.md, before:

Cover Letter for Data scientist job at Veterans Administration (VA) Health Administration

Dear Kayla August,

The VA has the nation's largest health care system.
This scale means big datasets and big opportunities to analyze the data and make an impact.
As a PhD candidate in statistics and data science at UC Davis my research has focused on addressing the inherent computational challenges.
Solving them requires analytical and computational skills, both of which I have.

I have not yet worked extensively with healthcare data, but I can learn.
I knew nothing about fashion or women's clothing when I started consulting last January for Lulu's fashion boutique, an online retailer.
But within two weeks I learned about their data, produced practical predictive models for when items would be returned, identified actionable patterns in sizing affecting tens of thousands of customers, and presented the results clearly to the CEO and company executives.
Indeed, one reason I chose data science as a profession is that I enjoy learning about new domains and new kinds of data.

For the last 10 years I've gone out of my way to work with veterans.
After I was honorably discharged from the Army in 2008 I led OEF/OIF combat veterans on mountain expeditions with Outward Bound Wilderness to assist in transitioning from war to civilian life.
While studying mathematics at UC Berkeley I organized events for hundreds as an officer of the vibrant Cal Veterans Group.
As a budding data scientist at Cisco Systems I was an active member of the veterans organization.
As a  I volunteer regularly as a tutor for student veterans at the newly opened Veterans Success Center.
I care about serving veterans, which is why I would like to work for the VA.

Sincerely,
Richard Clark Fitzgerald

Commit message:

starting to re draft letter

admin/va/fitzgerald_cover_letter.md, after:

Dear Kayla August,

<!--
Intro, state basics, show excitement
-->

My name is Richard Clark Fitzgerald, and I'm a PhD candidate in statistics at UC Davis.
I'm applying for the position of Statistician (Data Scientist) at the Veteran's Health Administration.
This job at the Veteran's Administration (VA) appeals to me for two reasons.
First, I believe in the mission of serving veterans.
I'm an Army veteran of Afghanistan, and I have worked and volunteered with veterans for the last 10 years.
Second, the VA has the nation's largest health care system, which must generate rich and interesting data sets.
As a data scientist, I'm excited about opportunities to scientifically improve policy and health care through data analysis.

<!--
What I can uniquely bring to the job
-->
I see this job as an opportunity to make a strong local connection between the VA and the UC Davis Data Science Initiative (DSI).
The DSI

<!--
More about me
-->

I am qualified for this job based on a combination of 2 years specialized work experience in data science, and education, a masters degree in statistics.


I can 

As a PhD candidate in statistics and data science at UC Davis my research has focused on addressing the inherent computational challenges.
Solving them requires analytical and computational skills, both of which I have.

I have not yet worked extensively with healthcare data, but I can learn.
I knew nothing about fashion or women's clothing when I started consulting last January for Lulu's fashion boutique, an online retailer.
But within two weeks I learned about their data, produced practical predictive models for when items would be returned, identified actionable patterns in sizing affecting tens of thousands of customers, and presented the results clearly to the CEO and company executives.
Indeed, one reason I chose data science as a profession is that I enjoy learning about new domains and new kinds of data.

For the last 10 years I've gone out of my way to work with veterans.
After I was honorably discharged from the Army in 2008 I led OEF/OIF combat veterans on mountain expeditions with Outward Bound Wilderness to assist in transitioning from war to civilian life.
While studying mathematics at UC Berkeley I organized events for hundreds as an officer of the vibrant Cal Veterans Group.
As a budding data scientist at Cisco Systems I was an active member of the veterans organization.
As a  I volunteer regularly as a tutor for student veterans at the newly opened Veterans Success Center.
I care about serving veterans, which is why I would like to work for the VA.

Sincerely,
Richard Clark Fitzgerald
