admin/va/notes.md, before:

Position: GS12 Statistician (Data Scientist) at VA Veterans Health Administration

Extracting some of the phrases and keywords

# Summary

This position is located in the Clinical Informatics Office reporting to the Associate Chief of Staff, Clinical Informatics and the primary purpose of the position is to perform a wide range of data analysis for the health care system, curating "tailored to fit" data products for the healthcare system's officials (i.e. interactive visualizations, predictive models, etc.)


# Responsibilities

 

Utilize and excellent working knowledge of SQL used to pull data from the VA's corporate data warehouse.

Formulate and defend their own analysis plans and articulate their needed resources. Expected to independently execute the approved plan.

Address technical and administrative challenges independently (i.e. negotiating database storage privileges, arrange for software packages to be installed from Office of IT etc.) that may come up during the execution of a project.

Make recommendations on new or modified developments, priorities, and objectives to improve performance in major facility operations. Specifically, the incumbent must have the ability to make inferences about policy improvements, work flow adjustments etc, from their work on data.

Independently lead the analytical plan and articulate findings in a way that is coherent to both technical and non-technical audiences using plain language and visualization.

Conduct formal and informal presentations, as required, to justify and defend administrative aspects of the projects that needs to be carried out (i.e. simulating the outpatient consultation system to better predict access to care, predicting the choice of empirical antibiotics, gauging the accuracy of colonoscopies in colon cancer prevention, establish gold standards for wound care in wound care clinics etc.).

Participate in the preparation and presentation or briefings to officials regarding study results.

Provide management with latest information and predictive advice concerning various alternative courses of action in resolving exceedingly complex problems as described above.

Develop and implement an analytical pipeline in the form of a deployable application
to be used by staff.

Document own work, prepare report for officials and for academic presentation and publications.

Familiar with IRB submissions, grantsmanship, and research methodologies to assist in operation research happening in the service.

Experience must demonstrate the following: expert knowledge and mastery in applying a wide range of advanced computational methods in simulation (i.e., agent based modelling), statistics (logistic regression, multinomial regression, survival analysis ), machine learning (random forest, SVM, neural networks), feature extraction/feature engineering, data transformation specifically in their application in healthcare operation/healthcare research and advanced data visualization (i.e., web/interactive visualization).

In addition the application must demonstrate the ability to learn and master new unfamiliar computational methods with minimal instruction or oversight;
show expert knowledge in an upper level programing language the like of Python, Matlab, Java, R in ability to manipulating data for the sake of data filtering, statistical & machine learning modeling, model selection, model validation and data visualization;
development on PC and/ or Linux/Unix;
working knowledge in using SQL language;
Python notebooks to generate complex publication ready material and academic press be in in print and/or on the web;
and working knowledge in MS-word, Latex, R markdown.


# Notes

Possible points to convey in cover letter:

- Can do the full data science stack: questions, math models, implementation, communication
- Local connection to UC Davis Data Science Initiative and statistics department unique and valuable, healthcare AI movement at UC Davis
- I've been working and volunteering with veterans for last 10 years
- Visualization software development
- Leadership and initiative
- My research expertise in large data analysis is useful for this job
- (Not sure?) I haven't worked with healthcare data- could turn it around and say I've worked with all these other types of data.
- Learning excites me, I already know the tools and techniques- for this position I'm excited to learn about the healthcare domain, very rich and impactful
- I am currently qualified for this job based on a combination of education (MS statistics) and 2 years of work experience in data science.


# References

- Duncan
- Pamela
- Earl
- Jerry
- Stephan


# Jobs

## Cisco

business analyst

- Predicted sales using machine learning and statistical models
- Wrote SQL queries to pull and analyze data from corporate data warehouse
- Independently negotiatated database storage privileges
- Recommended and implemented work flow adjustments to more powerful data analysis software

## Davis

statistics PhD candidate

- Research focused on an automatic system to scale and customize R data analysis code
- Formulated and defended research plan for PhD qualifying examination
- Created interactive web visualizations based on custom statistical data analysis
- Developed and implemented an analytical pipeline deployed on Apache Hive database
- Awarded 4 different grants and fellowships worth a total of $170,000, including the prestigious National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
- Reported periodically to grant officials on achievements and progress
- Presented results formally at international academic conference (Joint Statistical Meetings in Vancouver)
- Mastered the R programming language as the student of an R core developer (Duncan Temple Lang)

## Davis

Data Science Initiative Affiliate

- Created and presented advanced technical workshops to audiences of up to 100 on Python, R, and SQL

Skills: Python notebooks, R markdown, Latex, MS-word

## Lulus

Data Science Consultant

- Formulated general domain questions into quantitative models
- Created tailored to fit predictive statistical models for product returns
- Visualized, presented, and interpreted results to non technical executive audience
- Documented all steps of research in R markdown documents
- Designed computations to be deployable by other staff through GNU Make

Skills: R, Python, SQL, feature extraction, data transformation, Linux, Windows

## Climate Corp

- Developed custom data visualization software in popular Python package xarray
- Independently analyzed data to understand and visualize rainfall patterns 
- Presented results to general audiences of 300 people

Skills: Python, software engineering, Linux, visualization


Phrases from job description:

2. perform data analysis
1. curating tailored to fit data products
2. !!! data visualization
1. ! interactive visualizations
1. ! predictive models
1. ! independently execute/lead approved plan
2. ! present results formally/informally
0. justify projects to officials
0. formulate operational questions into quantitative models
0. implement solution in software
0. computational methods
1. pull data from corporate data warehouse
2. SQL
1. formulate analysis plan
0. articulate needed resources
1. independently address technical and administrative challenges
0. recommend policy improvements based on data
1. recommend work flow adjustments based on data
1. articulate findings to technical and non-technical audiences
0. advise management
1. analytical pipeline
1. deployable application used by staff
1. document work
0. reports for officials
1. IRB submissions, grantsmanship, and research methodologies


Work should show:

0. simulation
1. statistics
1. machine learning
0. feature extraction
0. model selection
0. data transformation, filtering
0. master new computational methods with minimal instruction
2. expert Python, R manipulating data
0. Linux
0. Python notebooks
0. MS-word
0. Latex
1. R markdown

Commit message:

starting to put skills sections

admin/va/notes.md, after:

Position: GS12 Statistician (Data Scientist) at VA Veterans Health Administration


# Summary

This position is located in the Clinical Informatics Office reporting to the Associate Chief of Staff, Clinical Informatics and the primary purpose of the position is to perform a wide range of data analysis for the health care system, curating "tailored to fit" data products for the healthcare system's officials (i.e. interactive visualizations, predictive models, etc.)


# Responsibilities
 

Utilize and excellent working knowledge of SQL used to pull data from the VA's corporate data warehouse.

Formulate and defend their own analysis plans and articulate their needed resources. Expected to independently execute the approved plan.

Address technical and administrative challenges independently (i.e. negotiating database storage privileges, arrange for software packages to be installed from Office of IT etc.) that may come up during the execution of a project.

Make recommendations on new or modified developments, priorities, and objectives to improve performance in major facility operations. Specifically, the incumbent must have the ability to make inferences about policy improvements, work flow adjustments etc, from their work on data.

Independently lead the analytical plan and articulate findings in a way that is coherent to both technical and non-technical audiences using plain language and visualization.

Conduct formal and informal presentations, as required, to justify and defend administrative aspects of the projects that needs to be carried out (i.e. simulating the outpatient consultation system to better predict access to care, predicting the choice of empirical antibiotics, gauging the accuracy of colonoscopies in colon cancer prevention, establish gold standards for wound care in wound care clinics etc.).

Participate in the preparation and presentation or briefings to officials regarding study results.

Provide management with latest information and predictive advice concerning various alternative courses of action in resolving exceedingly complex problems as described above.

Develop and implement an analytical pipeline in the form of a deployable application
to be used by staff.

Document own work, prepare report for officials and for academic presentation and publications.

Familiar with IRB submissions, grantsmanship, and research methodologies to assist in operation research happening in the service.

Experience must demonstrate the following: expert knowledge and mastery in applying a wide range of advanced computational methods in simulation (i.e., agent based modelling), statistics (logistic regression, multinomial regression, survival analysis ), machine learning (random forest, SVM, neural networks), feature extraction/feature engineering, data transformation specifically in their application in healthcare operation/healthcare research and advanced data visualization (i.e., web/interactive visualization).

In addition the application must demonstrate the ability to learn and master new unfamiliar computational methods with minimal instruction or oversight;
show expert knowledge in an upper level programing language the like of Python, Matlab, Java, R in ability to manipulating data for the sake of data filtering, statistical & machine learning modeling, model selection, model validation and data visualization;
development on PC and/ or Linux/Unix;
working knowledge in using SQL language;
Python notebooks to generate complex publication ready material and academic press be in in print and/or on the web;
and working knowledge in MS-word, Latex, R markdown.


# Notes

Possible points to convey in cover letter:

- Can do the full data science stack: questions, math models, implementation, communication
- Local connection to UC Davis Data Science Initiative and statistics department unique and valuable, healthcare AI movement at UC Davis
- I've been working and volunteering with veterans for last 10 years
- Visualization software development
- Leadership and initiative
- My research expertise in large data analysis is useful for this job
- (Not sure?) I haven't worked with healthcare data- could turn it around and say I've worked with all these other types of data.
- Learning excites me, I already know the tools and techniques- for this position I'm excited to learn about the healthcare domain, very rich and impactful
- I am currently qualified for this job based on a combination of education (MS statistics) and 2 years of work experience in data science.


# References

- Duncan
- Pamela
- Earl
- Jerry
- Stephan


# Jobs

## Cisco

business analyst

- Predicted sales using machine learning and statistical models
- Wrote SQL queries to pull and analyze data from corporate data warehouse
- Independently negotiatated database storage privileges
- Recommended and implemented work flow adjustments to more powerful data analysis software

## University of California, Davis

statistics PhD candidate

- Research focused on an automatic system to scale and modify R code based on the data it analyzes
- Formulated and defended research plan for PhD qualifying examination
- Created interactive web visualizations based on custom statistical data analysis
- Developed and implemented an analytical pipeline deployed on Apache Hive database
- Awarded 4 different grants and fellowships worth a total of $170,000, including the prestigious National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
- Reported periodically to grant officials on achievements and progress
- Presented results formally at international academic conference (2018 Joint Statistical Meetings in Vancouver)
- Mastered the R programming language as the student of an R core developer, Duncan Temple Lang

Skills: statistics, machine learning, data analysis, R, Python, SQL, simulation, feature extraction, model selection, data transformation, filtering, manipulating data, Linux, Python notebooks, Latex, R markdown


## Davis

Data Science Initiative Affiliate

- Created and presented advanced technical workshops to audiences of up to 100 on Python, R, and SQL

Skills: Python notebooks, R markdown, Latex, MS-word

## Lulus

Data Science Consultant

- Formulated general domain questions into quantitative models
- Created tailored to fit predictive statistical models for product returns
- Visualized, presented, and interpreted results to non technical executive audience
- Documented all steps of research in R markdown documents
- Designed computations to be deployable by other staff through GNU Make

Skills: R, Python, SQL, feature extraction, data transformation, Linux, Windows

## Climate Corp

- Developed custom data visualization software in popular Python package xarray
- Independently analyzed data to understand and visualize rainfall patterns 
- Presented results to general audiences of 300 people

Skills: Python, software engineering, Linux, visualization


Phrases from job description:

2. perform data analysis
1. curating tailored to fit data products
2. !!! data visualization
1. ! interactive visualizations
1. ! predictive models
1. ! independently execute/lead approved plan
2. ! present results formally/informally
0. justify projects to officials
0. formulate operational questions into quantitative models
0. implement solution in software
0. computational methods
1. pull data from corporate data warehouse
2. SQL
1. formulate analysis plan
0. articulate needed resources
1. independently address technical and administrative challenges
0. recommend policy improvements based on data
1. recommend work flow adjustments based on data
1. articulate findings to technical and non-technical audiences
0. advise management
1. analytical pipeline
1. deployable application used by staff
1. document work
0. reports for officials
1. IRB submissions, grantsmanship, and research methodologies


Work should show:

0. simulation
1. statistics
1. machine learning
0. feature extraction
0. model selection
0. data transformation, filtering
0. master new computational methods with minimal instruction
2. expert Python, R manipulating data
0. Linux
0. Python notebooks
0. MS-word
0. Latex
1. R markdown
